Chapter 11 Packaging and Deploying Java Code/Modules
Exam Objectives
Define modules and their dependencies, expose module content including for reflection. Define services, providers, and consumersUse module import declarationsCompile and run Java source code, including compact source files, instance main methods, and multi-file source-codeprograms Produce modular and non-modular jars, runtime imagesImplement migration to modules using unnamed and automatic modules
11.1 Compilation Basics ☝
NOTE: Although we haven't seen any question testing on the following topics, it is better to understand them because they arementioned explicitly in the exam objectives. 
Importing classes
There are four ways to import a class into the current class:
1. Explicitly importing a specific class, for example, import java.util.ArrayList;2. On-demand import - Importing all of the classes of a package on-demand, for example, import java.util.*;3. Module import - Importing all of the classes of a module using a module import statement in Java 25, for example, importmodule java.base; It imports all of the public top-level classes and interfaces in the packages exported by the modulejava.base to the current module, and the packages exported by the modules that are read by the current module due to reading themodule java.base. Thus, for example, the module import declaration import module java.sql; has the same effect as importjava.sql.*; plus on-demand imports for the indirect exports of the java.sql module, which include the packagesjava.logging and java.xml.4. Importing an aggregator module - An aggregator module does not export any packages itself but does export the packagesexported by the modules it requires. For example, the java.se module does not export any packages, but it requires nineteenother modules transitively, so the effect of import module java.se; is to import the packages exported by thosemodules, and so on, recursively - specifically, the 123 packages listed as the indirect exports of the java.se module.An important limitation of this feature is that you cannot used import module java.se; in a class of the unnamedmodule because the unnamed module is not allowed to read the java.se module. It can read java.base module but notjava.se.
Example:The following four import declarations can be replaced by a single import declaration, import module java.base; becausethese classes are public members of the packages exported by module java.base:
import java.util.Map; import java.util.function.Function; import java.util.stream.Collectors; import java.util.stream.Stream; class TestClass{ ... } 
Ambiguous imports - If the module import or on-demand import statements cause multiple classes with the same name to beimported, refering to such a class will cause compilation failure due to ambiguous reference. To eliminate the error, you will eitherneed to explicitly import the specific class that you want to use or use the fully qualified class name.
Compact source files and instance main method
To execute a Java program in previous Java versions, there had to be public Java class with a main method with the signature:public static void main(String[] args). To make it easy for new Java developers to write simple Java programs,Java 25 has introduced the following features:
1. Launchable main methods: A main method can now omit public, static, and String[] args, which simplifies the Hello, World!program to:
class HelloWorld { void main() { System.out.println("Hello, World!"); } } 
2. Compact source files - Java 25 allows a compact form of source file, where the class declaration can also be omitted. Thus, afile Test.java containing just the following three lines can be executed directly using command: java Test.java
void main() { System.out.println("Hello, World!"); } 
Test.java would be a "compact source file".3. Java 25 adds a new class named IO in the java.lang package that provides basic line-oriented I/O methods for beginners,thereby replacing System.out.println with a simpler form:
void main() { IO.println("Hello, World!"); } 
4. Default imports - Every compact source file is considered to import the java.base module automatically, as if the declarationimport module java.base; appears at the start of every compact source file. Thus, the following code will run and printcurrent date without any import statement for java.util.Date:
void main(){ IO.print(new Date()); } 
Launchable main method protocol
As per JEP 512, the launcher starts the Java Virtual Machine and then chooses and invokes a main method of the specified class inthe following manner:
1. If the class declares or inherits a main method with a String[] parameter then the launcher chooses that method. Otherwise,if the class declares or inherits a main method with no parameters then the launcher chooses that method. Otherwise, thelauncher reports an error and terminates.2. If the chosen method is static then the launcher invokes it.3. Otherwise, the chosen method is an instance main method. The class must have a non-private constructor with no parameters.The launcher invokes that constructor and then invokes the chosen main method of the resulting object. If there is no suchconstructor then the launcher reports an error and terminates.4. Any main method that can be chosen and invoked under this protocol is known as a launchable main method.
Compact source file
If the Java compiler encounters a source file with fields and methods that are not enclosed in a class declaration, it will consider thesource file to implicitly declare a class whose members are the unenclosed fields and methods. Such a source file is called acompact source file. The implicitly declared class of a compact source file has the following properties:
1. It is a final top-level class in the unnamed package.2. It extends java.lang.Object and does not implement any interfaces.3. It has a default constructor with no parameters, and no other constructors.4. It has, as its members, the fields and methods in the compact source file.5. It must have a launchable main method; if it does not, a compile-time error is reported.
6. Even though the Java compiler will generate an implementation dependent class name, this class does not have a name that canbe used in source code.
11.2 Module basics ☝
Naming a module
1. A module name follows the same rules and conventions as the package and class name. The name must be a valid Javaidentifier (so, special characters such as dash and slash are out but underscore and dot are in) and it should follow the reversedomain name pattern to avoid name clash. Let us say we are developing an application for finance and one of its functions is tocompute simple interest. We want to deliver this simple interest calculator as a module. So,com.abc.finance.calculators.simpleinterest would be a good name for our module. However, let's justname the module simpleinterest to reduce clutter. Let us also decide that the FQCN of our class will besimpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator instead ofcom.abc.finance.calculators.simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator for the same reason.2. There is no relation between the module name and the package name(s) of the class(es) contained in that module. However,since both follow the reverse domain name convention, they may very well be the same.
The exam expects you to be able to identify valid and invalid module names. As explained above, the rules fornaming a module are the same as those for naming a package. Thus, for example, the following are valid modulenames: a (length is not important), _m (may start with and contain _), n$, (may start with and contain $), x1 (maycontain a number) and a.b (may contain dots) but the following are invalid: 1x, (cannot start with a number), a-b,(cannot contain hyphens), and a..b (cannot contain consecutive dots).
The module descriptor
Every module must have a module descriptor that specifies the name of the module, what it provides, and what it requires. A moduledescriptor is a file by the name module-info.java. It is compiled into module-info.class. E.g.:
//in file module-info.java module simpleinterest{ }
Directory structure of a module
A module resides in a folder by the same name as the name of the module. This rule applies to the source files as well as the classfiles. If the module directory contains the source code, it is called "source module definition" and if the module directory containscompiled classes, it is called "module definition".
Thus, in our example, the source code and compiled classes of our module must reside in folders named simpleinterest. Thefollowing image shows the directory structure that I will use to develop and execute the code for our module:
My base directory is c:\ocp21\moduletest. This is the directory where I am going to develop and run all the code presentedin this chapter. If you are using Linux/MacOS, you can create a moduletest directory under /home/<username>. (Rememberto flip \ to / in directory paths if you are using Linux/MacOS.) 
Under the base directory, I have a src directory, where I will keep the source code for all of my modules. Since this particularmodule is named simpleinterest, I have a directory by the same name under src. The directory tree rooted atsimpleinterest is therefore, the source module definition of the simpleinterest module. Furthermore, since ourSimpleInterestCalculator class belongs to the simpleinterest package, I havekept SimpleInterestCalculator.java under simpleinterest\simpleinterest. 
Note that it is not necessary to follow the package structure for organizing Java source files. You may keep all your Java sourcefile(s) directly under the module root folder as well. However, organizing the source code as per their packages has a couple ofadvantages. Besides making the source code easy to navigate, it is understood well by the Java compiler. The compiler canautomatically locate and compile the code present in a source module definition. 
The contents of SimpleInterestCalculator.java are as follows:
package simpleinterest; public class SimpleInterestCalculator{ public double calculate(double principle, double rate, double time){ return principle*rate*time; } public static void main(String[] args){ System.out.println(new SimpleInterestCalculator().calculate(100, .05, 2)); } } 
Compiling a module
Open a command/shell prompt, cd to the c:\ocp21\moduletest directory and run the following command:
c:\ocp21\moduletest>javac -d out --module-source-path src --module simpleinterest
The above command uses three command line switches: -d, --module-source-path, and --module. 
 -d out will cause the compiler to produce its output in the out directory. The compiler will create the out directory if it doesnot already exist. 
The --module-source-path switch tells the compiler the location of the source module definition. Since we have kept oursource code in a directory under the src directory, that is what we have specified here as well. Observe the double dash in thisswitch.
Since the name of the module is simpleinterest, the compiler will create a simpleinterest directory under out. Theout\simpleinterst directory is the simpleinterest module's "root directory" and the tree rooted undersimpleinterest is the module definition of the simpleinterest module. 
The compiler will save the class files of this module inside out\simpleinterest as per the package driven directory structureof the classes of this module. For example, since SimpleInterestCalculator class is in simpleinterest package, thecompiler will put SimpleInterestCalculator.class under out\simpleinterest\simpleinterest directory. 
Note that I am using relative paths instead of absolute paths (i.e. out instead of c:\ocp21\moduletest\out). Relative pathsare relative to the current directory, and since our current directory is c:\ocp21\moduletest, out resolves toc:\ocp21\moduletest\out. You may use absolute paths and relative paths interchangeably in these commands but it is betterto use relative paths because they will work even if your base directory something different from c:\ocp21\moduletest.
The --module switch specifies the name of the module that we want to compile. The compiler tries to locate this module in thepaths specified in module-source-path. In this case, we want to compile the simpleinterest module. Again, observe thedouble dash.
Based on the above options, the compiler will look for module-info.java under src\simpleinterest directory and willcompile all the Java files under all the directories that are present inside src\simpleinterest directory.
Upon successful execution of the above command, you should see the directory structure as shown below:
Running a module
Running a module means executing the main method of a class contained in that module. Thus, the class that we want to executemust have the standard main method. The following command shows how to run our simpleinterest module that we justcompiled.
c:\ocp21\moduletest>java --module-path out --modulesimpleinterest/simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator
This command uses two switches: --module-path and --module. 
The module-path switch is used to tell Java the location of the module definition. This is the directory where the module's rootdirectory is located or, if the module is packaged as a jar file, module-path is the directory where that jar is located. In our case, wehave specified out in module-path because our module's root directory, i.e., simpleinterest, is located in out.
The module switch is used to tell Java the name of the module that we want to execute. Observe the value specified for --module. It is in the format <module name>/<main class name> because, as of now, our module is present in an explodedformat and does not contain any information about the main class. So, we need to tell the JVM about the class that we want to run aswell. Once we package our module into a jar, we won't need to specify the main class on the command line.
Packaging a module
1. The process of packaging classes of a module into a jar file is the same as the one we saw for packaging classes into a regularjar. The name of the jar is, by convention, the same as the name of the module (with .jar extension, of course). Inside the jarfile, class files must exist in their package driven directory structure. Since a module also has a module-info.class in itsroot folder, the jar file must also have this class in the root folder. 2. Note that the requirement of having the module-info.class in the root folder of the jar implies that it is not possible topackage multiple modules in the same jar. 
Since a modular jar (including its name) mimics the organization of a module, a modular jar is also considered as the "moduledefinition" of a module. 
Here is the command that will package our module into a jar file: 
c:\ocp21\moduletest>jar --create --file simpleinterest.jar --main-classsimpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator -C out\simpleinterest .
This should create simpleinterest.jar in the moduletest directory.
The --create switch tells the jar tool that we want to create something and the --file and the subsequent value specify the jarfile that we want to create. The --main-class switch makes the jar tool add a Main-Class entry in the resulting jar file's
manifest.
The -C switch needs some explanation. We want the jar file to mimic the directory structure of the module, which means thestructure inside the jar file should be the same as the structure inside the out\simpleinterest directory. But we are executingthe command from the moduletest directory. There are two extra levels under moduletest (out and simpleinterest)that we don't want reflected in the jar file. The -C option is to make the jar tool change its working directory before adding files tothe jar. We want it to step down to out\simpleinterest directory and then include the files from there.
The dot at the end of the command means that we want to include everything in its current directory (which is nowout\simpleinterest due to the use of the -C switch) to be included in the jar file. The following two images show thecontents of simpleinterest.jar created by the above command. The first image shows the contents at the root level and thesecond image shows the contents of the simpleinterest folder:
 
This module can now be run using the following command:
c:\ocp11\moduletest>java --module-path . --module simpleinterest
Observe that, since we added the Main-Class attribute in jar's manifest, we are able to run the module without specifying themain class on the command line. 
Note that the location of SimpleInterestCalculator.class inside the module jar is exactly the same as it would havebeen had the class file been placed in a regular jar, i.e., under <root>/simpleinterest. This means, an application thatdoesn't understand modules can use a modular jar as if it were a regular jar. The only extra thing in a modular jar is the module-info.class file in the root folder, which will be ignored by a non-modular application. For example, you can runSimpleInterestCalculator in the old fashioned way with this command:
c:\ocp21\moduletest>java -classpath .\simpleinterest.jar simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCa
You won't be tested on how to create a jar file in the exam. However, executing a module packaged in a jar file is on the exam. So, itwould be good if you understand how a modular jar file is created.
Understanding module-path
Another interesting thing in the above command is the value that we have specified for module-path. We have specified only adot for the module-path because our module jar is in the current directory. A module-path contains all the locations where youwant the JVM to search for module definitions. While trying to load a module, the JVM looks for that module in all the locationsspecified in the module-path. It expects to find exactly one of the two things - a directory with the same name as the name of themodule or a jar file containing module-info.class for that module. The name of the jar file is not important because the JVMtakes the name of the module from the module-info.class contained in the jar file. The same module should not be presentmore than once on the module-path, otherwise the JVM will complain.
In the command used above, while searching for the module named simpleinterest, the JVM will look for a jar file that
contains module-info.class with the module name as simpleinterest at the root or a directory by the name ofsimpleinterest containing appropriate module-info.class.
11.3 Enabling access between modules ☝
Using exports and requires directives
Separating the interface and the class that implements that interface into separate modules allows us to build an application bymixing and matching modules.
In our case, we will create a calculators.InterestCalculator interface in calculators module. We will then haveour SimpleInterestCalculator class implement this interface. Here is the interface definition:
//in file calculators\calculators\InterestCalculator.java package calculators; public interface InterestCalculator{ public double calculate(double principle, double rate, double time); } 
and the following is the module descriptor for the new module:
//in file calculators\module-info.java module calculators{ exports calculators; } 
1. To make a package of a module eligible to be accessible to other modules, the package must first be "exported" explicitly in themodule descriptor using the exports clause. 2. Only packages can be exported and not individual classes. When you export a package, all of the public types contained in thatpackage are made eligible to be accessible by other modules. 3. In module parlance, accessing a module is called "reading" the module. So, the exports clause in the above code makes theInterestCalculator interface eligible to be read by classes in other module. 4. An exports clause is only one of the two requirements that must be fulfilled for a module to access classes from anothermodule. The second requirement is the requires clause.
The directory structure of this module is as per the source module definition format explained earlier.The c:\ocp21\moduletest\src\calculators directory is the source directory for this module. It contains module-info.java and calculators\InterestCalculator.java files. Let us run the following command to compile thismodule:
c:\ocp21\moduletest>javac -d out --module-source-path src --module calculators
This should create appropriate output in the out directory.
Let us now move our attention to the simpleinterest module. Since we want SimpleInterestCalculator to implementInterestCalculator interface, we need to first make our intention clear by stating that our simpleinterest module"requires" access to the calculators module by modifying simpleinterest's module descriptor as follows:
module simpleinterest{ requires calculators; } 
1. A requires clause makes the other module "readable" in this module. This is also known as module readability. 2. All the packages exported by the other module can be accessed by a module that declares its dependency on that module usingthe requires clause.
We can now modify SimpleInterestCalculator.java as follows:
package simpleinterest; import calculators.InterestCalculator; public class SimpleInterestCalculator implements InterestCalculator{ public double calculate(double principle, double rate, double time){ return principle*rate*time; } public static void main(String[] args){ InterestCalculator ic = new SimpleInterestCalculator(); System.out.println(ic.calculate(100, .05, 2)); } } 
The following command can be used to compile this module:
c:\ocp21\moduletest>javac -d out --module-source-path src --module simpleinterest
After the compilation of this module, our directory structure looks like this:
We can now execute the simpleinterest module as we did before using the following command: c:\ocp21\moduletest>java --module-path out --modulesimpleinterest/simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator
Using Qualified Exports
1. The exports clause opens up a package to access from all other modules. Once a package is exported, you cannot stop anyother module from accessing it. It is similar to making a member of a class public, and just like the public modifier, theexports clause makes a module less encapsulated. 2. The Java module system allows you to fine tune access to a module only to specific modules using a variation of the exportsclause. It is called the exports-to exports to clauseclause or the qualified exports clause. 
The following is how it is used:
module <modulename>{ exports <packagename> to <modulename(s)>; } 
For example, in the following module-info, the com.abc.datatransfer package is being made accessible only to db andservice modules:
module datatransfer{ exports com.abc.datatransfer to db, service; } 
1. The modules for which a package is made readable are called "friendly" modules.2. There is no particular order in which unqualified and qualified exports have to appear in a module-info. Conventionally,however, qualified exports are listed after all the unqualified exports.3. It is a compile-time error if the package being exported using the exports or the exports-to clause does not exist in thecurrent module but it is fine if the module listed in the to clause does not exist.
Using transitive dependencies
Module dependencies are not transitive and if module A specifies that it requires only module B, it cannot read module C justbecause B reads C. This is a problem because what if a class in module A needs to invoke a method of a class in module B, whosereturn type is defined in module C? Something like this:
module ui{ requires hr; } module hr{ requires valueobjects; exports hrservice; } 
//code appearing in a class in ui module HRService hrService = new HRService(); //HRService is defined in hr module Employee e = hrService.getEmployee(employeeId); //Employee is defined in valueobjects mo
Since the ui module does not have a requires valuesobjects; clause, the ui module cannot access the Employee classfrom the valuesobjects module. Thus, the above code will fail to compile. 
The obvious solution is to add a requires valuesobjects; clause in the ui module. But this solution has a seriousproblem. What if the hr module has several requires clauses? How would the ui module know which of the hr module'srequires clauses should be added to its module-info? Only multiple compilation failures can make this information known tothe ui module!
This is where the requires transitive clause comes into picture. Since the hr module knows that whichever module requireshrservice package, will require classes in the valueobjects module as well, it documents this information using therequires transitive clause, like this:
module hr{ requires transitive valueobjects; exports hrservice; } 
This basically says that if you require the hr module, then you also require the valueobjects module. But more than merelydocumenting this fact, the requires transitive clause also eliminates the need for adding an extra requiresvaluesobjects; clause in the ui module. The requires hr; clause in the ui module automatically makes all the modulestransitively required by hr module, readable to the ui module. This is called "implied readability".
Duplicate import statement vs duplicate requires/export clausesHaving duplicate import statements in a Java source file doesn't make any sense but Java has, historically, permitted duplicateimport statements. However, Java does not permit having duplicate requires clauses in a module-info. Therefore, thefollowing module-info.java will not compile:
module hr{ requires valueobjects; requires valueobjects; //duplicate, not allowed } 
Requiring the same module in a requires clause and in a requires transitive clause is not allowed either. Thus, thefollowing will not compile:
module hr{ requires valueobjects; requires transitive valueobjects; //duplicate, not allowed } 
Similarly, duplicate export and exports to clauses are not permitted either.
Cyclic/Circular dependencyJava does not allow modules to circularly depend on each other. For example, if module a contains a requiresb; clause, then module b cannot have a requires a; clause. Similarly, even an indirect circular dependency (i.e.a requires b, b requires c, and c requires a) is not allowed either.
Circular dependencies within classes and packages is allowed though.
Using opens/opens-to/open directives
Normally, packages that have not been exported by a module cannot be accessed by other modules. However, to enable older non-modular application to keep running as before, the Java Module system provides a way to allow applications to use the un-exportedpackages at run time but prevent them from using the un-exported packages at compile time. 
This is done using the opens, opens-to, and open directives.
The opens directive
The opens directive lets other modules access the public and protected types of this package at run time, but not at compiletime. For example:
module simpleinterest{ //exports simpleinterest; //commenting it out because we don't want anyone to use this opens simpleinterest; //lets any code that depends on this package to run } 
If the simpleinterest module exported the simpleinterest package, other modules may have been using theSimpleInterest class directly. Replacing it with the opens clause ensures that their application does not fail at run time butalso forces them to stop using SimpleInterest class directly in their code.
The opens-to directive
The opens-to directive is a qualified opens directive that works just like the qualified exports directive. It allows only thelisted modules to have a runtime dependency on this package.
The open directive
If you want to open all public and protected packages of a module, then you may apply the open directive to the moduledeclaration itself instead of applying the opens directive to each package individually. For example:
open module simpleinterest{ //opens simpleinterest; //can't have any opens directive if the module is open. } 
Opening a package for Reflection
1. Normally, classes packaged in one module code cannot be accessed through Reflection by code from another module. 2. A module can open itself up for reflective access from other modules by specifying the open or opens/opens-to directivesin its module-info. 3. The open directive allows all members, irrespective of their access modifiers, of the module to be accessible through theReflection API. 
4. The opens directive makes only the members of the specified package to be accessible through reflection.5. The opens-to directive allows reflective access to the package mentioned in the opens clause only to the modules listed inthe to clause.
11.4 Compile Java code, produce modular and non-modular jars, runtime images ☝
Compiling multiple modules at once Multiple modules can be compiled together listing them in the --module switch. E.g.:
c:\ocp21\moduletest>javac -d out --module-source-path src --modulecalculators,simpleinterest
Using a module without source code The --module-path switch can be used for telling javac the location of a third party module whose source code is notavailable. For example, if the calculators module was packaged as a third party Java named calculators.jar, we can putthis jar in any folder (e.g. modulejars) and specify its path in the module-path while compiling the simpleinterest module:
c:\ocp21\moduletest>javac --module-path modulejars -d out --module-source-path src --module simpleinterest
1. We can specify the actual jar name in the --module-path or just the directory that contains it. 2. We can specify as many directories as we need separated by the path separator (; on windows and : on *nix). The differencebetween specifying a directory and specifying a jar is that when you specify a directory, all the jars as well as exploded moduledefinitions present in that directory become available to the compiler (or to the jvm, in the case of execution), while in the othercase, only the jar that you specify on the module path becomes available.
The command to run simpleinterest with explicitly listed jar files in the module-path looks like this:
c:\ocp21\moduletest>java --module-path modulejars\simpleinterest.jar;modulejars\calculators.jar --module simpleinterest
Summary of command line switches used for compilation
For compiling a Java class and/or module, you need to remember the following five command line options:
1. --module-source-path: This switch is used to specify the location of the module source files. It should point to thedirectory that contains source module definition. In other words it should point to the parent directory of the directory wheremodule-info.java of the module is stored. For example, if your module name is moduleA, then the module-info.javafor this module would be in moduleA directory and if moduleA directory exists in src directory, then src should be specified inthe --module-source-path option, i.e., --module-source-path src
If moduleA depends on another module named moduleB, and if moduleB directory exists in src2 directory, you can add thisdirectory in --module-source-path as well, i.e., --module-source-path src;src2.
2. -d: This switch is required when you compile a module. It is used to specify the output directory. This is the directory wherejavac will generate the module and package driven directory structure and the class files for the sources. For example, if youspecify out as the output directory, javac will create a directory under out with the same name as the name of the module andwill create class files with appropriate package driven directory structure under that directory.
3. --module or -m: This switch is used when you want to compile all the source files of a particular module. This option ishelpful when you want to compile all the files at once without listing any of the source files of a module individually in the
command.For example, if you have two Java files in moduleA, stored under moduleA\a\A1.java and moduleA\a\A2.java, youcan compile both of them at the same time using the command: javac --module-source-path src -d out --modulemoduleAJavac will find out all the Java source files under moduleA and compile all of them. It will create the class files under the outputdirectory specified in -d option, i.e., out. Thus, the out directory will now have two class files: moduleA/a/A1.class andmoduleA/a/A2.class.
4. --module-path or -p: This option specifies the location(s) of any other module upon which the module to be compileddepends. You can specify the module directories or jar files containing the module classes here. For example, if you want to compilemoduleA and if it depends on some other module named abc.util, then you can add this to your javac command like this:javac --module-source-path src --module-path thirdpartymodules/abc.util.jar -d out --module moduleA
5. -classpath or -cp or --class-path: This option is used for compilation of non-modular code. If you are compilingregular non-modular code but that code depends on some classes, then you can put those classes/jars on the classpath using -classpath option.Note: This option is not helpful for compilation of modular code because classes in modular code cannot read classes present onclasspath. Modular code can only see other modular code. That is why, non-modular classes have to be converted into "automaticmodules" and specified on --module-path as explained earlier.
Summary of command line switches used for execution
You need to know about the following three command line switches for running a class that is contained in a module:
1. --module-path or -p: This switch tells the location of the module definition. If the module is packaged in a jar file, thenyou can either specify the path to the jar, or specify the path to the directory where the jar file stored (relative to the current directoryor an absolute path). For example, --module-path c:\javatest\modulejarsYou can also specify the location where the compiled module exists in the exploded form. For example, if your module is namedabc.math.utils and this module is stored in c:\javatest\output, then you can use: --module-pathc:\javatest\output. Remember that c:\javatest\output directory must contain abc.math.utils directory andthe module files (including module-info.class) must be present in their appropriate directory structure underabc.math.utils directory. 
You can specify as many module locations separated by path separator (; on windows and : on Linux/MacOS) as required.
2. --module or -m: This switch is used to specify the module that you want to run. For example, if you want to runabc.utils.Main class of abc.math.utils module, you should write --moduleabc.math.utils/abc.utils.MainIf a module jar's manifest contains the Main-Class property, you can omit the main class from the command. For example, you canwrite, --module abc.math.utils instead of --module abc.math.utils/abc.utils.Main.
3. -classpath or --class-path or -cp: This switch is used while executing non-modular code. It is also used whileexecuting a modular code to specify non-modular jars that are required by the project.
It is possible to treat modular code as non-modular by ignoring module options altogether. Forexample, if you want to run abc.utils.Main class using the older classpath option, you canstill do it like this:java -classpath mathutils.jar abc.utils.Main
11.5 Automatic and Unnamed Modules ☝
Automatic Modules 
1. If you put a non-modular jar on the module-path, Java will consider the non-modular jar to be a module. Such a module iscalled "automatic module". 
2. Just like regular modules an automatic module is also a named module but, since there is no module-info for this modulewhere you can specify its name, the name of this module is created automatically by the Java Module system using the name ofthe jar file. For example, if you put mysql-driver-6.0.jar in --module-path, it will be loaded as an automaticmodule with name mysql.driver.3. While deriving the name of a module from the name of the jar file, you only need to know that hyphens are converted into dotsand the trailing version number (if present) and the file extension part are ignored. Here are a few examples:
myJdbcDriver.jar: myJdbcDrivercom_xyz_utils.jar: com.xyz.utilscommons-logging-1.3.1.jar: commons.loggingcommons-collections-4.5.0-M1.jar: commons.collectionsmy-Jdbc.Driver.jar: my.Jdbc.Driver4. It is also possible for a non-modular jar to specify its future module name using Automatic-Module-Name: <modulename> entry to the jar's MANIFEST.MF. This is useful when a team plans to modularize their library in future.
Since there is no module-info.class in a non-modular jar, there is no way to specify the packages that it exports using theexports clauses or to specify the jars that it depends on using the requires clauses. For this reason, Java provides an automaticmodule with two super powers:
1. an automatic module exports as well as opens all of its packages (so that any module can "read" those packages) and2. an automatic module is allowed to read all exported packages of modules that are available on the module-path as wellas all classes available on the classpath.
In other words, all public classes present in the jar file loaded as an automatic module are accessible to all other modules, and allthe classes of that jar are able to access all exported packages of all modules as well as all classes that are present on theclasspath. 
If your module depends on a non-modular third party jar, you just need to add a requires <module-name>; clause in themodule-info of your module and put that third party jar in your --module-path. 
For example, let's say the SimpleInterestCalculator class in our simpleinterest module usesorg.apache.commons.logging.Log class from commons-logging-1.3.1.jar. We need to update the module infofor simpleinterest as follows:
module simpleinterest{ requires commons.logging; //Observe that we are specifying the module name as derived } 
and, assuming that commons-logging-1.3.1.jar is present in the jars directory, we will include it in the --module-path of our javac as well as java commands as follows:
javac --module-path jars\commons-logging-1.3.1.jar --module-source-path src -d out --module simpleinterest andjava --module-path jars\commons-logging-1.3.1.jar;out --modulesimpleinterest/simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator
1. We have to create an automatic module out of a non-modular jar only if a modular jar is statically dependent on a class from anon-modular jar, i.e., only if a module refers to a class from the non-modular jar in its code and therefore, requires it duringcompilation. 2. If an automatic module requires a class from a non-modular jar, we need to simply place the non-modular jar on theclasspath during the execution of the module. This is because an automatic module is allowed to read all classes availableon the module-path as well as on the classpath.
E.g.: If commons-logging has a run time dependency on log4j, we just need to include log4j jar jar on the classpath in our javacommand as follows:
java --module-path jars\commons-logging-1.3.1.jar -classpath jars\log4j-api-2.23.1.jar -
As you can see, an automatic module is similar to other named modules but because of its super powers, it acts as a bridge betweenthe modular and the non-modular code. Without automatic modules, it wouldn't be possible for modular code to make use of existingnon-modular code.
Unnamed Module
1. All of the classes on the classpath are loaded by the JVM as a part of a single "unnamed module". 2. Classes of the unnamed module are allowed to read all exported packages of all modules available on the module-path andall the classes available on the classpath. 3. Since the unnamed module has no name, it is not possible to include this module in the requires clause of any module.Therefore, classes of an unnamed module are readable to other classes that are loaded from the classpath and to classes inautomatic modules but not to explicitly named modules.
Summary of readability of modules The following table summarizes the readability rules for the three types of modules:
Classes In↓ Can read→ Explicitly Named Modules AutomaticModules Unnamed Module
Explicitly named modules(provided a requires clause exists in module-info) Only exported and openedpackages All packages Cannot read anypackage Automatic Modules(cannot have a requires clause because module-info.javadoes not exist) All exported packages All packages All packages 
Unnamed Module(cannot have a requires clause because module-info.javadoes not exist) All exported packages All packages All packages 
11.6 Defining and using a service ☝
1. A service is a well-known interface that outlines the functionality that it provides through its methods. It has to be well-knownbecause the service is all that the client application knows about and is coupled to. 2. Technically, a service could be a concrete class as well but usually it is an interface or an abstract class. E..g.calculators.InterestCalculator could be a service. 3. There is nothing special that you need to do in the interface or the class to designate it as a service really. If you think itdescribes a service then it is a service. 4. A service provider is a class that implements the service. If the service is an interface then the service provider implementsthat interface and if the service is a an abstract class, then the service provider may be a subclass.E.g. simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator would be a service provider that implements the servicerepresented by the InterestCalculator interface.
Now that we have a service and a service provider, all we need is a way for the consumer application that consumes the service toget hold of a service provider. Note that the consumer application doesn't know about the service providers. It only knows about theservice. This is achieved in three steps: 
Step 1: Tie the service and the service provider together in the module-info of the module that contains the service providerusing the provides-with directive. For example:
module simpleinterest{ requires calculators; provides calculators.InterestCalculator with simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator; } 
You should observe the following two points about the above module-info:
1. This module requires the calculators module. This is necessary because it implements the InterestCalculatorinterface, which is defined in the calculators module. 2. This module does not export the simpleinterest package. There is no prohibition on exporting any package from theservice provider module but it is recommended to not do so to avoid any accidental dependency on it. After all, we don't wantclients to be tightly coupled to the service provider, which means, we don't want any one to directly refer tothe SimpleInterestCalculator class.
Step 2: Use the uses directive in the module-info of the consumer application that wants to use the service to declare that ituses that service. For example, an application packaged in an entirely separate module can declare that it uses theInterestCalculator service as follows:
module consumerclient{ requires calculators; uses calculators.InterestCalculator; } 
Observe that this module also requires the calculators module because that is the module in which InterestCalculatorinterface, i.e., the service, is defined but does not require the simpleinterface module. 
Step 3. Use the java.util.ServiceLoader class in the consumer code to get a list of service providers that provide theservice it is interested in and use them! For example, the client program named ConsumerMain packaged in theconsumerclient module can use the InterestCalculator service as follows:
package client; import calculators.InterestCalculator; import java.util.ServiceLoader; public class ConsumerMain{ public static void main(String[] args){ ServiceLoader<InterestCalculator> intrstCalcs = ServiceLoader.load(InterestCalculato for (InterestCalculator calc : intrstCalcs) { System.out.println("Got calculator : "+calc); System.out.println(calc.calculate(100, .05, 3)); } } } 
The ServiceLoader.load method fetches all service providers that provide the given service. If more than one providers areavailable, it is the consumer's responsibility to pick the one it wants to use. In the above code, I am just looping through all of themand invoking the calculate method on each of them. Since there is just one provider in this example, it doesn't matter, but ideally,the service interface should provide methods that can help the consumer decide if it really wants to use that particular serviceimplementation or not.
Compiling and Running the consumer client
Add the provides-with clause in the simpleinterest module as described in Step 1 and then compile this module usingthe following command:C:\ocp21\moduletest>javac -d out --module-source-path src --module simpleinterest
Create a module named consumerclient under the src folder with module-info.java as described in Step 2. Create aConsumerMain.java with content as listed in Step 3 above inside the consumerclient/client folder. Theconsumerclient module can now be compiled with the following command: C:\ocp21\moduletest>javac -d out --module-source-path src --module consumerclient
Once compiled, it can be run using the following command:C:\ocp21\moduletest>java --module-path out --module consumerclient/ConsumerMain
It should generate the following output:
Got calculator : simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator@5b6f7412 15.0 
Note that compiling the simpleinterest module first separately is important after updating its module-info. You can'texpect that javac will automatically compile the simpleinterest module if you ask it to compile theconsumerclient module. This is because the consumerclient module has absolutely no coupling with thesimpleinterest module. So, compiling the consumerclient module will only cause the compiler to compile thecalculators module along with the consumerclient module.
Requirements for a Service Provider
Since an instance of the service provider class is required to actually perform the service, the service loader architecture expects theservice provider to follow a few rules so that it can acquire an instance of the service provider. These are as follows:
1. The service provider must be public and must not be an inner class. It can be a top level class or a nested static class.2. The service provider should have a public static method named provider that takes no arguments and has a return type thatis assignable to the service's interface or class. If the service provide has such a provider method, then it will be invokedwhenever an instance of the service provider is need. Note that it is not necessary that this method must return a new instance. Itcould just return a cached instance too.3. If the service provider does not have a provider method, then it must have a public no-args constructor. It will be used toinstantiate the service provider whenever needed.
In the above example, I did not need the SimpleInterestCalculator class to have a provider method because it had a publicno-args constructor.
You might have read about the need to use a "Service Locator" to locate services. ServiceLocator is a well known design pattern that is used to separate out the logic of locating one ormore services in a one place. It is quite useful when an application has multiple services,multiple providers for multiple services, or uses multiple mechanisms to locate services suchas ServiceLoader, JNDI, or dependency injection. However, it is a higher level abstraction andhas nothing to do with the OCP exam. As far as the OCP exam is concerned a class that usesthe ServiceLoader and retrieves a service from it, is the consumer of that service. Whetherthis class acts as a service locator or uses that service itself is entirely up to the design of theapplication.
11.7 Migrating non-modular applications ☝
Reorganizing a non-modular application to use modules and compiling and running it using the modular options that you saw earlieris called migrating an non-modular application to a modular application. Ideally, a completely modular application is composed ofonly explicitly named modules, i.e., it does not contain any automatic modules or the unnamed module. 
Usually, making an application modular does not involve any change in the code but since modules create impermeable boundariesbetween the parts of a program by enforcing strict encapsulation principles, migrating an application is not always straightforward.Migrating any non-trivial application raises the following challenges:
1. How to split the application code base into modules?2. How to handle libraries provided by other teams of the organization that have already been modularized?3. How to handle libraries provided by other teams of the organization that have not yet been modularized but will bemodularized?4. How to handle third party libraries that are not expected to be modularized?
The first challenge is entirely about application design and there is no official list of steps that you can just follow. But here are afew guidelines based on experience. Since application is usually already organized into packages, the easiest approach would be tojust create a module per package but that actually defeats the purpose of having modules in the first place. A module is supposed tobe composed of all of the functionality that is usually required together. For example, if your application uses single sign-on (where auser logs in just once and then their identity is transferred across different applications transparently), you could have a modulecontaining all the functionality related to managing, authenticating, and authorizing a user. This module could then be used by anyapplication that wants a user to sign in. In this case, this module will most likely contain multiple packages. However, it wouldn't bea good idea to include code related to capturing the userid/password from a web page or displaying user information in that module
because that part is not something that every application will require. 
Similarly, if you think that all financial calculators created by your group are usually used together, you may bundle them up in asingle module even if you have organized them in different packages internally.
Since application design is a highly subjective area, it is not on the OCP exam. The OCP exam focus squarely on the rest of the threechallenges.
Migration Strategies
Since an application usually depends on code that is not managed by the same application team, it is not always possible to make anapplication completely modular from the start or to migrate it to be completely modular immediately. However, it is possible to startmodularizing parts of the application piece by piece and make it completely modular eventually sometime in the future. 
The Java team that designed developed the Java Platform Module System describes two strategies for migrating an application in"The State of the Module System" document, which is available at https://openjdk.org/projects/jigsaw/spec/sotms/These strategiesare called "Bottom up" and "Top down" migration strategies. The OCP exam expects you to know both of them. 
To make it quick and easy for you to understand, I will use a hypothetical application created by our team and is packaged in aregular jar file named taxfiling.jar. Classes in this jar use classes from three other jar files: 
1. a regular jar file named calculators.jar, which is also produced by our team, 2. a regular jar file named audit.jar produced by another team of our same company, 3. and a regular jar named charts.jar, which is produced by another company. 
The classes in calculators.jar and audit.jar further use an open source logging library packaged in a modular jar namedlogging.jar., whose module name is logging. So, running this application involves five jar files in total.
Based on the above information, we can draw a dependency graph for the above jar files as shown in the figure below:
Let's further assume that this application is currently non modular and is run from the command line as follows:
java -classpath taxfiling.jar;calculators.jar;audit.jar;logging.jar;charts.jarcom.abc.taxfiling.Main 
Our end goal is to make it completely modular and to be able to run it from the command line as follows:
java --module-path taxfiling.jar;calculators.jar;audit.jar;logging.jar;charts.jar --module taxfiling/com.abc.taxfiling.Main 
Note that you should be familiar with the -classpath, --module-path, and --module options by now.
11.8 Bottom up Migration ☝
In the Bottom-up migration strategy, we first try to convert those parts of the application into modules that do not depend on any othernon-modular part and place them on the module-path. Here, a "part" corresponds to a jar file that the application uses. We then repeatthis process until we are able to convert the last part, i.e., the top most jar in the dependency graph, into a module. Let's see how thisworks with our hypothetical example, step by step. 
Step 1: Since it is given that logging.jar is already modular and doesn't depend on anything else, we can immediately put it on themodule path. Hence, our command to run the application now changes to:
java --module-path logging.jar -classpath taxfiling.jar;calculators.jar;audit.jar;charts.jar com.abc.taxfiling.Main 
Observe that the jar containing the entry point of the application, i.e., taxfiling.jar, is still on the classpath. This commandworks because every class that is loaded from the classpath becomes part of the unnamed module and classes on the unnamedmodule are allowed to read all packages from the unnamed as well as named modules. 
Step 2: We can now shift our attention to calculators.jar. Since it doesn't depend on any non-modular jar and is controlled by ourteam, it is a good candidate for migration. To convert this library into a module, we need to create a module-info.java withthe following contents and place it into the root folder of the source code of the calculators library:
module calculators{ requires logging; //since this is the name of the module packaged in logging.jar exports calculators; //assuming that the package name that we want to export is calcul} 
Since this library doesn't depend on anything else, it can be easily recompiled into a modular jar using the compilation options forcompiling a module discussed before. At the end of this step, our command to run the application will be:
java --module-path logging.jar;calculators.jar -classpathtaxfiling.jar;audit.jar;charts.jar com.abc.taxfiling.Main 
Step 3:As this point, we have to wait until the other team that is responsible for producing audit.jar modularizes it. Once the other teammodularizes audit.jar, we can place it on module-path just like calculators.jar. However, we will now be stuck untilthe company responsible for producing charts.jar modularizes it. Let's say they modularize charts.jar as well and in thatcase, our command will become:
java --module-path logging.jar;calculators.jar;audit.jar;charts.jar -classpathtaxfiling.jar; com.abc.taxfiling.Main 
Step 4:We are now in a position where we can covert taxfiling.jar into a module by creating the following module-info (assumingthat audit and charts modules contain appropriate exports directives that make the packages used by taxfiling applicationreadable): 
module taxfiling{ requires calculators; requires audit; requires charts; } 
After the recompilation and repackaging of the taxfiling application with the above module-info, our final command to run thisapplication will be:
java --module-path logging.jar;calculators.jar;audit.jar;charts.jar; taxfiling.jar; --module taxfiling/com.abc.taxfiling.Main 
That is exactly what we wanted to achieve. 
You must have noticed that this process has a serious issue. We cannot modularize taxfiling.jar until all its dependencies aremodularized and since we are not in control of all the dependencies, we are at the mercy of other teams. This is undesirable in mostsituations, and so, the bottom-up approach is seldom used for migrating non-trivial projects. 
To summarize, in the Bottom-up approach:
1. Dependencies are migrated first and the target application jar is migrated later.
2. Every jar (or every potential module) gets moved to the module-path.3. Nothing is left on the classpath.
11.9 Top-down Migration ☝
In the Top-down migration strategy, we start with converting the top most application jar into a module. While doing so, we mustalso place those non-modular jars on the module-path upon which the topmost module directly depends, thereby turning them into"automatic modules". Recall that an automatic module exports all of its packages and is allowed to read all exported packages fromother modules. Also, recall that the module name of an automatic module is derived using the name of its jar file and is therefore,known in advance. This name is used in the module-info of the top most jar. Let's see how this will work in our case.
Step 1: We start by creating the module-info for taxfiling.jar. Since it is given that it depends on calculators.jar,audit.jar, and charts.jar, which are not modular jars, we must use these jars as automatic modules and, in that case, theirmodule names will be calculators, audit, and charts, respectively. Thus, the module-info.java for the taxfilingmodule will be as follows:
module taxfiling{ requires calculator; requires audit; requires charts; } 
We can now recompile the code for the taxfiling module and create a new modular taxfiling.jar. Hence, our command to runthe application now changes to:
java --module-path logging.jar;calculators.jar;audit.jar;charts.jar;taxfiling.jar --module taxfiling/com.abc.taxfiling.Main
Observe that the jar containing the entry point of the application, i.e., taxfiling.jar, is now on the module-path already. So, itlooks like we are done but actually we are not. We haven't converted calculators.jar to a regular module yet.
Step 2: We can follow the same process to convert calculators.jar into a module. We can use the following module-info.javafor this module:
module calculators{ requires logging; exports calculators; } 
Observe that we are now officially exporting the calculators package from the calculators module. In the previous step,this package was exported automatically. After recompiling and creating the new modular calculators.jar, we can place it onthe module-path and run the application with the same command as before. Now, we are done.
Step 3:Since we don't control the source code for other libraries, we don't try to modularize them. We are already using them as automaticmodules. Once they migrate their code to modules, we can use their new jars (with appropriate changes in the module-info for thetaxfiling and calculators modules if needed) but our command won't change. Note that if an automatic module depends ona third party non-modular jar, we don't need to convert that jar into an automatic module. It can remain on the classpath. We don'thave that case in this example, but if logging.jar were not a modular jar, we would leave it on the classpath becausetaxfiling.jar doesn't depend on it directly.
As you can see we can proceed with modularization of our code in the top-down approach without waiting for other teams to finishmodularization of their code. Since, with this approach all teams can work on modularizing their code base as per their convenience,this is the preferred approach in most cases. The only issue with this approach is that we may have to edit our module-info if we geta new modular jar that has a different module-name than what we have used.
To summarize, in the Top-down approach:
1. The target application jar is migrated first and the dependencies are migrated later.2. Not every jar (or not every potential module) gets moved to the module-path.3. Some jars may be left on the classpath
You may see ambiguous and vaguely worded statements in a few questions about modules. Just remember theabove summary and cross out the options that are obviously incorrect and then select the best option.
11.10 Understanding the modular JDK and Tools ☝
Modular JDK The Modular JDK project divided the JDK into several loosely coupled modules that can be combined at compile time, build time,as well as run time, into a variety of configurations as per the needs of the applications and the platform. For example: a large serverside application can use the full JDK but a micro-service can be packaged with only the modules that are absolutely essential. It alsoallows applications that are bundled along with the runtime, to be shipped with smaller profiles, thus, increasing the reach of Javaapplications to more devices and platforms.
Organization of the Modular JDK
1. The packages, or API packages, as they are called in technical jargon, contained in the Java platform are distributed intovarious modules. These modules can be categorized into two broad categories - standard modules and non-standard modules. 2. The modules that are governed by the Java Community Process (JCP) are called Standard modules. Their names start withjava. For example, java.base, java.sql, and java.logging are standard modules. 3. All other modules that are specific to a JDK are called non-standard modules. Their names start with jdk. For example,jdk.jdeps, jdk.rmic, and jdk.javadoc are non-standard modules. 4. Similarly, standard packages have names starting with java or javax such as java.lang, java.sql, javax.crypto,and javax.net, and the JDK specific non-standard packages, generally, have names starting with jdk such asjdk.internal.perf, jdk.internal.logger , and jdk.internal.util. 5. Depending on the provider of the JDK, it may have packages reflecting the company name as well such as sun.net orsun.utils.resource. 6. A standard module may contain non-standard packages but a non-standard module does not contain any standard package. 7. The standard and non-standard modules are then combined to make a variety of Java configurations such as the full Java SEPlatform, the full JRE, and the full JDK.
The Java SE Platform
1. The Java Platform, Standard Edition (Java SE) is the core Java platform for general-purpose computing. It is composed onlyof the standard modules (i.e. whose names start with java) and is required to be supported by all Java implementations. Youdo not need to remember all the modules available in this platform but some of the most commonly used modules in thisplatform are java.base, java.desktop, java.logging, java.sql, java.prefs, and java.net.http. Allof the programs that you have written or will write for preparing for the Java certification exam will require just this platform. 2. Note that this does not imply that the Java SE platform includes all of the standard modules. For example, java.cardio is astandard module (it is governed by the JCP) but is not a part of the Java SE Platform. 3. Neither does it imply that this platform itself will not make use of classes from non-standard packages or modules because astandard module may contain non-standard packages. 4. All it means is that none of the modules included in the Java SE Platform "export" any non-standard package. In other words, ifyour module "requires" only the modules contained in the Java SE platform, it will depend only on the standard Java packagesand will be portable to all Implementations of the Java SE Platform.
The java.base Module
1. This module defines the foundational APIs of the Java SE platform. By foundational, we mean that it lies at the core of all Javaplatforms. 2. This module doesn't require any other module but every other module depends on this module. 3. You need not remember the complete list of packages contained in this module but here are a few important packages that youshould be aware of - java.lang, java.lang.annotation, java.io, java.nio, java.net, java.util,java.util.concurrent, java.security, and java.time. 
4. We never need to write requires java.base; in the module declarations of any module because the Java compiler doesnot require it to be specified explicitly. Much like the java.lang package is not required to be imported in a class explicitly,the java.base module is not required to be specified in a requires clause of a module explicitly. It is always assumed tobe "required".
New tools and command line optionsIf you look at the JDK's bin directory (for example, C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-21\bin on a Windows machine), youwill see several executable files. These are mostly the tools that come bundled with the JDK. These tools are used to performvarious activities that we do while developing, testing, and running Java applications. You have already used three of them -javac.exe, which launches the Java compiler, java.exe, which launches the JVM, and jar.exe, which creates a jar file.When you graduate to developing industrial strength Java applications, you will use several other tools such as jdb, javadoc, javap,and javaw.
With the advent of Java modules, the JDK has added new tools as well as a few new switches (i.e. command line options) to theexisting tools specifically to work with Java modules. For the purpose of OCP exam, you need to be aware of what these options andtools are and what they do.
Command line options related to modules
We have already discussed the --module-path and --module-source-path options in detail. These are, of course,applicable to the java as well the javac command.
--show-module-resolution: This new switch is applied to the java command to make it print module resolutioninformation while executing a Java program. Basically, if you want to know what all modules are being referred to while running aprogram, this is the option to use. For example, check out the output produced by Java if you use this option while executing oursimpleinterest module.
C:\ocp21\moduletest\>java --show-module-resolution --module-path out --module simpleinte
Output:
root simpleinterest file:///C:/ocp21/moduletest/out/simpleinterest/ simpleinterest requires calculators file:///C://ocp21/moduletest/out/calculators/ java.base binds jdk.jdeps jrt:/jdk.jdeps ... ... omitting several such lines ... java.rmi requires java.logging jrt:/java.logging 10.0 
The first line of the output shows that the root module is simpleinterest (because this the module Java is about to execute) andthat it is loaded from C:/ocp21/moduletest/out/simpleinterest/. The second line shows that simpleinterest requires the calculators module, which is loaded fromC:/ocp21/moduletest/out/calculators. We know that calculators doesn't require any other module. However, every module requires the java.base module. So, therest of the lines show the details of the loading of the java.base module.The last line is the output from our SimpleInterestCalculator's main method. 
Note that the show-module-resolution option shows module level details only. It doesn't tell you which package or whichclass from a module is actually required.
To enable older applications use newer modular libraries, Java provides following the command line options (applicable forjavac as well as java): 
1. --add-exports module/package=other-module(,other-module)*: This option specifies a package tobe considered as exported from its defining module to additional modules or to all unnamed modules when the value of other-moduleis ALL-UNNAMED. This is useful when a module does not export a package through an exports clause in its module-info butanother module has a compile time dependency on it.
2. --add-reads module=other-module(,other-module)*: This option specifies additional modules to be
considered as required by a given module.
jdeps
Jdeps is a new tool specifically designed to help you deal with modules without executing them. Using this tool, you can find outmodule, package, as well as class level dependencies of a given module. It can analyze an exploded module or a module jar. Let'srun it on our simpleinterest module and see what it produces.
c:\ocp21\moduletest\>jdeps --module-path out --module simpleinterest 
Output:
[file:///C:/ocp21/moduletest/out/simpleinterest/] requires calculators requires mandated java.base (@11.0.2) simpleinterest -> calculators simpleinterest -> java.base simpleinterest -> calculators calculators simpleinterest -> java.io java.base simpleinterest -> java.lang java.base 
It shows that simpleinterest uses calculators as well as java.base modules. It also shows that simpleinterestdepends on the calculators package from the calculators module and java.io and java.lang packages from thejava.base module.
If you want to see class level dependencies, you can try the -verbose:class option:
c:\ocp21\moduletest\>jdeps -verbose:class --module-path out --module simpleinterest 
Output:
[file:///C:/ocp21/moduletest/out/simpleinterest/] requires calculators requires mandated java.base (@11.0.2) simpleinterest -> calculators simpleinterest -> java.base simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator -> calculators.InterestCalculator calcul simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator -> java.io.PrintStream java.b simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator -> java.lang.Object java.b simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator -> java.lang.String java.b simpleinterest.SimpleInterestCalculator -> java.lang.System java.b
Jdeps is a powerful tool with several options but for the OCP exam, the information provided above is sufficient.
jmod
Java 9 also introduces a new way to package Java code into "jmod" files. This packaging method is used when you need to packageartifacts such as native code that can't be put in jar files. However, a jmod file cannot be executed and is therefore, only used atcompile time and link time. It is not a replacement for jar files. Don't worry, you don't need to go in the details of jmod files. But youmay still see the jmod command mentioned in an exam question. For that, you should remember the basic syntax of the jmodcommand:
jmod (create|extract|list|describe|hash) [options] jmod-file
The first argument to jmod is its operation mode. It has to be one of five - create, extract, list, describe, and hash.
1. create - Creates a new JMOD archive file2. extract - Extracts all the files from the JMOD archive file3. describe - Prints the module details4. list - Prints the names of all the entries, i.e., files contained in the jmod file5. hash - Determines leaf modules and records the hashes of the dependencies that directly and indirectly require them.
Out of the above, only the describe mode is related to modules. An important difference between the jmod command andjava/javac commands is that hyphen (, i.e., -) is not used to specify mode.
JImage
Normally, running a Java application requires the presence of the standard JRE, which includes all the standard modules andpackages and is therefore, quite large in terms of disk size. The modularized JDK introduced with Java 9 allows you to create acustomized JRE image containing just the parts that are required for your application thereby reducing the overall size by a lot. Sucha custom JRE image is packaged in a .jimage file. A JImage file can be created and managed using tools such as jlink andjimage, which are available in the JDK. 
It is not clear how deep the exam expects you to go into the creation of a JImage file but based on feedback from the recent OCP Java21 exam takers, you should at least know the following points:
1. Creation of a JImage does not require an application to be modular because it is meant for creating customized JREs by cherrypicking modules from the standard JRE. Customized JRE images can be created for modular as well as non-modularapplications.2. Since a JImage is basically a customized JRE, it is not platform independent (i.e. it is not "cross platform"). A JImage is createdfor a specific platform. Note that a Java application is platform independent but a JRE is not.3. A JImage may include all sorts of files including binaries as well as class files from the application as well as from the JRE.